1560
Problem Statement Title	
Rapid colorimetric and artificial intelligence-based methods for determining the microbial quality of raw milk, processed milk, and milk products
Description	
Background: Milk is perishable product, it requires immediate processing after few hours (2-4Hrs) of production, otherwise, bacterial load increases and milk gets deteriorate. At present Methytene Blue Dye Reduction Test, commonly known as MBRT test is used as a quick method to assess the microbiological quality of raw and pasteurized milk. This test is based on the fact that the blue colour of the dye solution added to the milk get decolourized when the oxygen present in the milk get exhausted due to microbial activity. The sooner the decolourization, more inferior is the bacteriological quality of milk assumed to be. This test is widely used at the dairy reception dock, processing units and milk chilling centres where it is followed as acceptance/rejection criteria for the raw and processed milk. Further, processed dairy products may also get spoiled in the supply chain for microbiological reasons. Description: The above mentioned MBRT has to be done under sterile conditions. Take 10 ml milk sample in sterile MBRT test tube. Add 1 ml MBRT dye solution (dye concentration 0.005%). Stopper the tubes with sterilized rubber stopper and carefully place them in a test tube stand dipped in a serological water bath maintained at 37t1oC. Record this time as the beginning of the incubation period. Decolourization is considered complete when only a faint blue ring (about 5mm) persists at the top. However, for processed dairy products, the enumeration of bacterial load is time-consuming and requires different methods. Expected solution: The above mentioned MBRT takes 4 to 6 Hours for completion of the test. Therefore, it is proposed to develop cost effective, rapid and portable method/Machine to deduct microbial load in Raw and Pasteurized Milk as compared to present Methylene blue reduction test (MBRT).Meanwhile, smart packaging tools such as freshness indicators could be a solution for processed dairy products.ln this context, artificial intelligence, machine vision, systems, etc. could be explored.
Organization	Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying
Department	Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying
Category	Hardware
Theme	MedTech / BioTech / HealthTech